Their collective era was suffused with wide-ranging creativity, but also marked by the declining status of women, and the incorporation of untouchability into an organized system of belief. In south India, the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian-languages scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of southeast Asia. In the early medieval era, Christianity, Islam, Judaism and Zoroastrianism put down roots on India's southern and western coasts. Armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's plains. eventually establishing the Delhi sultanate, and drawing northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam. In the 15th century, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture in south India. In the Punjab, Sikhism emerged, rejecting institutionalized religion. The Mughal empire, in 1526, ushered in two centuries of relative peace. leaving a legacy of luminous architecture. Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company followed, turning India into a colonial economy, but also consolidating its sovereignty. British Crown rule began in 1858. The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and ideas of education, modernity and the public life took root. A pioneering and influential nationalist movement emerged,. which was noted for nonviolent resistance and led India to its independence in 1947. India is a secular federal republic governed in a democratic parliamentary system. From being a comparatively destitute country in 1951,. Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture. The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as Indoi (Ἰνδοί), which translates as "The people of the Indus". A modern rendering of the historical name Bharatavarsha, which applied originally to a region of the Gangetic Valley, Bharat gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India. Many Indian festivals are religious in origin. India at Curli. India from the BBC New. 