World War I (often abbreviated as WWI or WW1), also known as the First World War, the Great War, the Seminal Catastrophe, and initially in North America as the European War, was a global war originating in Europe that lasted from 28 July 1914 to 11 November 1918. Contemporaneously described as "the war to end all wars", it led to the mobilisation of more than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million Europeans, making it one of the largest wars in history. On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb Yugoslav nationalist, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, leading to the July Crisis. In response, on 23 July Austria-Hungary issued an ultimatum to Serbia. Serbia's reply failed to satisfy the Austrians, and the two moved to a war footing. A network of interlocking alliances enlarged the crisis from a bilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe. By July 1914, the great powers of Europe were divided into two coalitions: the Triple Entente—consisting of France, Russia, and Britain—and the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy (the Triple Alliance was only defensive in nature, allowing Italy to stay out of the war until April 1915, when it joined the Allied Powers after its relations with Austria-Hungary deteriorated). The war was fought in and drew upon each power's colonial empire as well, spreading the conflict to Africa and across the globe. The Allies rallied and drove the Germans back in their Hundred Days Offensive, a continual series of attacks to which the Germans had no reply. It is considered to mark the end of the Second Industrial Revolution and the Pax Britannica. Political and military alliance. For much of the 19th century, the major European powers had tried to maintain a tenuous balance of power among themselves, resulting in a complex network of political and military alliances. The biggest challenges to this were Britain's withdrawal into so-called splendid isolation, the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the post-1848 rise of Prussia under Otto von Bismarck. Victory in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War established Prussian hegemony in Germany, while victory over France in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian War unified the German states into a German Reich under Prussian leadership. In 1873, to isolate France and avoid a war on two fronts, Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany. Attempts by Britain in 1880 to resolve colonial tensions with Russia and diplomatic moves by France led to Bismarck reforming the League in 1881. The creation of the German Reich following victory in the 1871 Franco-Prussian War led to a massive increase in Germany's economic and industrial strength. Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and Wilhelm II, who became Emperor in 1890, sought to use that to create a Kaiserliche Marine or Imperial German Navy to compete with Britain's Royal Navy for world naval supremacy. This was driven by Russia's recovery from the 1905 Revolution, specifically increased investment post 1908 in railways and infrastructure in its western border regions. With a pistol, Princip shot and killed Ferdinand and his wife Sophie. A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to death. On 1 August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilised and declared war on Russia. This also led to the general mobilisation in Austria-Hungary on 4 August. Opening hostilitie. Since the Germans were able to choose where to stand, they normally had the advantage of the high ground; in addition, their trenches tended to be better built, since Anglo-French trenches were initially intended as "temporary," preparatory to breaking the German defences. The Germans made initial gains, before French counter-attacks returned matters to near their starting point. After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria. The Macedonian Front was initially mostly static. Russian armies generally had success in the Caucasus. Initial action. Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German offer to be a ploy to create divisions amongst the Allies. With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front. Restoration of the Kingdom of Polan. General disarmamen. The freedom of the sea. Germany complied. Many Germans thought victory was near. On 11 November, at 5:00 am, an armistice with Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at Compiègne. The occupation of the Rhineland took place following the Armistice. The areas in the East were larger. Baralong incident. An academic study done in 1928 put the death toll at 424,000. Over half the German regiments in Belgium were involved in major incidents. Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. E. The law went through several changes before the war ended. The age limit was also eventually raised to 51 years old. This was much resented. Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns. Lists of World War I topic. Graphic color photos, pictures and musi. Maps of Europe covering the history of World War I at omniatlas. co. Europe at the end of the wa. 
Library guide. 