Japan (Japanese: 日本, Nippon [ɲippoꜜɴ] (listen) or Nihon [ɲihoꜜɴ] (listen); formally 日本国, Nippon-koku or Nihon-koku, lit. 'State of Japan') is an island country in East Asia. Located in the Pacific Ocean, it lies off the eastern coast of the Asian continent and stretches from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea and the Philippine Sea in the south. The kanji that make up Japan's name mean 'sun origin', and it is often called the "Land of the Rising Sun". Japan is the world's 4th largest island country and encompasses about 6,852 islands. The stratovolcanic archipelago has five main islands: Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, Shikoku and Okinawa which make up about 97% percent of Japan's land area. The country is divided into 47 prefectures and unofficially into eight regions, with Hokkaido being the northernmost prefecture and Okinawa being the southernmost prefecture. Japan is the 2nd most populous island country. The population of approximately 126 million is the world's eleventh largest, of which 98. 5% are ethnic Japanese. 90. 7% of people live in cities, while 9. 3% live in the countryside. About 13. 8 million people live in Tokyo, the capital of Japan. Archaeological research indicates that Japan was inhabited as early as the Upper Paleolithic period. The first written mention of Japan is in Chinese history texts from the 1st century AD. Influence from other regions, mainly China, followed by periods of isolation, particularly from Western Europe, has characterized Japan's history. Although it has officially renounced its right to declare war, Japan maintains a modern military with the world's eighth-largest military budget, used for self-defense and peacekeeping roles; it ranked as the world's fourth-most powerful military in 2015. As of 2019, Japanese citizens had visa-free or visa-on-arrival access to 189 countries and territories, ranking the Japanese passport 1st in the world, tied with Singapore. 
Etymolog. The Japanese word for Japan is 日本, which is pronounced Nihon or Nippon and literally means "the origin of the sun". The earliest record of the name Nihon appears in the Chinese historical records of the Tang dynasty, the Old Book of Tang. This name may have its origin in a letter sent in 607 and recorded in the official history of the Sui dynasty. Prince Shōtoku, the Regent of Japan, sent a mission to China with a letter in which he called himself "the Emperor of the Land where the Sun rises" (日出處天子). The message said: "Here, I, the emperor of the country where the sun rises, send a letter to the emperor of the country where the sunsets. Another form of Wa (委), Wei in Chinese) was used for an early state in Japan called Nakoku during the Han dynasty. Prehistoric and ancient histor. A Paleolithic culture around 30,000 BC constitutes the first known habitation of the Japanese archipelago. According to the Records of the Three Kingdoms, the most powerful kingdom on the archipelago during the third century was called Yamataikoku. 
Classical er. Tokugawa Ieyasu served as regent for Hideyoshi's son and used his position to gain political and military support. When open war broke out, Ieyasu defeated rival clans in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600. This ended in the mid-1990s when Japan suffered a major recession. The country, including all of the islands it controls, lies between latitudes 24° and 46°N, and longitudes 122° and 146°E. Together they are often known as the Japanese archipelago. The Boso Triple Junction off the coast of Japan is a triple junction where the North American Plate, the Pacific Plate and the Philippine Sea Plate meets. Japan was originally attached to the eastern coast of the Eurasian continent. Japan's geographical features divide it into six principal climatic zones: Hokkaido, Sea of Japan, Central Highland, Seto Inland Sea, Pacific Ocean, and Ryukyu Islands. Japan has diplomatic relations with nearly all independent nations and has been an active member of the United Nations since December 1956. In 2017, Japan had the fifth largest diplomatic network in the world. Tourism from abroad is one of the few promising businesses in Japan. Most Japanese continue to see Japan as a monocultural society. They are considered very important in Japan. Indigenous ideas of loyalty and honor have been held since the 16th century. 