John Christopher Depp II (born June 9, 1963) is an American actor, producer, and musician. He has been nominated for 10 Golden Globe Awards, winning one for Best Actor for his performance of the title role in Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2008) and has been nominated for three Academy Awards for Best Actor, among other accolades. He is regarded as one of the world's biggest film stars. Depp rose to prominence on the 1980s television series 21 Jump Street, becoming a teen idol. He has gained critical praise for his portrayals of inept screenwriter-director Ed Wood in the film of the same name, undercover FBI agent Joseph D. Pistone in Donnie Brasco, author J. Depp is the third highest-grossing actor worldwide, as films featuring Depp have grossed over US$3. 7 billion at the United States box office and over US$10 billion worldwide. He has been listed in the 2012 Guinness World Records as the world's highest-paid actor, with earnings of US$75 million. His most commercially successful films are the Pirates of the Caribbean series, which grossed US$4. 5 billion, the Fantastic Beasts film series, which grossed US$1. 3 billion, Alice in Wonderland, which grossed US$1 billion, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, which grossed US$474 million, and The Tourist, which grossed US$278 million. Depp had a supporting role in Oliver Stone's 1986 Vietnam War film Platoon and played the title character in the 1990 romantic dark fantasy Edward Scissorhands. Depp has collaborated on nine films with director, producer and friend Tim Burton. He has performed in numerous musical groups, including forming the rock supergroup Hollywood Vampires along with Alice Cooper and Joe Perry. 
Early life and ancestr. John Christopher Depp II was born on June 9, 1963, in Owensboro, Kentucky, the youngest of four children of waitress Betty Sue Palmer (née Wells) and civil engineer John Christopher Depp. Depp moved frequently during his childhood. At the 2016 Grammys Depp played a song in Tribute to Palmer, stating: "So the words of the song was this toast by my stepfather, who made his exit about 15 years ago. He was this really cool guy. He was a bit of a rounder. My great-grandmother was quite a bit of Native American, she grew up Cherokee or maybe Creek Indian. Critical response to his claims from the Native community increased after this, including satirical portrayals of Depp by Native comedians. An ad featuring Depp and Native American imagery, by Dior for the fragrance "Sauvage", was pulled on August 30, 2019 after charges of cultural appropriation and racism. 
Caree. Depp's first film role was in the horror film A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984), in which he played the boyfriend of heroine Nancy Thompson (Heather Langenkamp) and one of Freddy Krueger's victims. After a starring role in the comedy Private Resort (1985), Depp was cast in the lead role of the skating drama Thrashin' (1986) by the film's director, but the decision was later overridden by its producer. Instead, Depp appeared in a minor supporting role as a Vietnamese-speaking private in Oliver Stone's Vietnam War drama Platoon (1986). Despite his success, Depp felt that the series "forced [him] into the role of product. " He subsequently decided to appear only in films that he felt were right for him. He appeared in three films in 1993. He portrayed Joseph D. Donnie Brasco was a commercial and critical success, and is considered to contain one of Depp's finest performances. In 1997, Depp also debuted as a director and screenwriter with The Brave. He recorded demos and worked with Bruce Witkin to shape his vocals without a qualified voice coach. He earned praise for the role, with a headline from The A. Variety reported in 2018 that Depp will portray W. Eugene Smith in an independent film drama called Minamata. 
Other venture. You cannot plan the kind of deep love that results in children. It was part of the wonderful ride I was on. He also donated £1 million to the hospital the following year. Evidence of the alleged abuse from her court filings was also published in the media. I have faith in my kids. S. See als. External link. The New York Times. 