The Big Bang Theory is an American television sitcom created by Chuck Lorre and Bill Prady, both of whom served as executive producers on the series, along with Steven Molaro. All three also served as head writers. The show premiered on CBS on September 24, 2007 and concluded on May 16, 2019, having broadcast a total of 279 episodes over 12 seasons. The show originally centered on five characters living in Pasadena, California: Leonard Hofstadter and Sheldon Cooper, both physicists at Caltech, who share an apartment; Penny, a waitress and aspiring actress who lives across the hall; and Leonard and Sheldon's similarly geeky and socially awkward friends and co-workers, aerospace engineer Howard Wolowitz and astrophysicist Raj Koothrappali. Over time, supporting characters were promoted to starring roles, including neuroscientist Amy Farrah Fowler, microbiologist Bernadette Rostenkowski, physicist Leslie Winkle, and comic book store owner Stuart Bloom. The show was filmed in front of a live audience and was produced by Warner Bros. Television and Chuck Lorre Productions. The Big Bang Theory received mixed reviews from critics throughout its first season, but reception was more favorable in the second and third seasons. Later seasons saw a return to a lukewarm reception, with the show being criticized for a decline in comedic quality. Despite the mixed reviews, seven seasons of the show have ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings, ultimately reaching the no. 1 spot in its eleventh season. The show was nominated for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series from 2011 to 2014 and won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series four times for Jim Parsons. In total, it won seven Emmy Awards from 46 nominations. Parsons also won the Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Television Comedy Series in 2011. The series also spawned a prequel series in 2017 based on Parsons' character, Sheldon Cooper, named Young Sheldon, which also airs on CBS. 
Productio. The show's pilot episode premiered on September 24, 2007. This was the second pilot produced for the show. A different pilot was produced for the 2006–07 television season but never aired. The only main characters retained in both pilots were Leonard (Johnny Galecki) and Sheldon (Jim Parsons), who are named after Sheldon Leonard, a longtime figure in episodic television as producer, director and actor. The first pilot included two female lead characters - Katie, "a street-hardened, tough-as-nails woman with a vulnerable interior" (played by Canadian actress Amanda Walsh) and Gilda, a scientist colleague and friend of the male characters (played by Iris Bahr). Sheldon and Leonard meet Katie after she breaks up with a boyfriend and they invite her to share their apartment. Gilda is threatened by Katie's presence. The original pilot used Thomas Dolby's hit "She Blinded Me with Science" as its theme song. They brought in the remaining cast and retooled the show to its final format. Prior to its airing on CBS, the pilot episode was distributed on iTunes free of charge. Production was halted on November 6, 2007, due to the Writers Guild of America strike. The series returned on March 17, 2008, in an earlier time slot and ultimately only 17 episodes were produced for the first season. After the strike ended, the show was picked up for a second season, airing in the 2008–2009 season, premiering in the same time slot on September 22, 2008. With increasing ratings, the show received a two-year renewal through the 2010–11 season in 2009. In March 2014, the show was renewed again for three more years through the 2016–17 season. In March 2017, the series was renewed for two additional seasons, bringing its total to 12, and running through the 2018–19 television season. According to executive producer/co-creator Bill Prady, "We're working on giving Sheldon an actual problem that he's going to be working on throughout the [first] season so there's actual progress to the boards . . . He saw early versions of scripts which needed scientific information added to them, and he also pointed out where the writers, despite their knowledge of science, have made a mistake. He sometimes needed assistance from Mayim Bialik, who has a Ph. D. in neuroscience. 
Theme son. Co-lead singer Ed Robertson was asked by Lorre and Prady to write a theme song for the show after the producers attended one of the band's concerts in Los Angeles. By coincidence, Robertson had recently read Simon Singh's book Big Bang, and at the concert improvised a freestyle rap about the origins of the universe. The theme was included on the band's greatest hits album, Hits from Yesterday & the Day Before, released on September 27, 2011. The salary for the three went up to $200,000 per episode for the fourth season. Helberg and Nayyar were also able to renegotiate their contracts, giving them a per-episode pay in the "mid-six-figure range", up from around $100,000 per episode they each received in years prior. Television. The deal was an increase from the $175,000 – $200,000 the duo had been making per episode. 
Cast and character. Leonard is a nerd who loves video games, comic books, and Dungeons & Dragons. Leonard is smitten with his new neighbor Penny when they first meet, and they eventually marry. Jim Parsons as Sheldon Cooper: Originally from Galveston, Texas, Sheldon was a child prodigy with an eidetic memory who began college at the age of eleven, and earned a PhD at age sixteen. He is determined to have his own way, continually boasts of his intelligence, and has an extremely ritualized way of living. Kaley Cuoco as Penny: An aspiring actress from Omaha, Nebraska. Penny moves in across the hall from Sheldon and Leonard. Penny becomes friends with Bernadette and Amy, and they often hang out in each other's apartments. Penny and Leonard form a relationship and eventually marry. Unlike Sheldon, Leonard, Raj, Bernadette and Amy, Howard does not hold a doctorate. Gilbert returned to The Big Bang Theory for its 200th episode. They date and later get engaged and married. Amy believes she and Penny are best friends, a sentiment that Penny does not initially share. Stuart implies he is in financial trouble and that the comic book store now also is his home. He is later invited to join the guys' group while Howard is in space. Wolowitz's death, Stuart continues to live in her home, along with Howard and Bernadette, until he finds a place of his own. Prior to meeting Raj, Emily was set up on a blind date with Howard. Massimino played himself multiple times in the role of Howard's fellow astronaut. Bill Nye appeared in the seventh and twelfth seasons. 
Episode. Recurring themes and element. Science has also interfered with the characters' romantic lives. The same night he draws up "The Relationship Agreement" to verify the ground rules of him as her boyfriend and vice versa (similar to his "Roommate Agreement" with Leonard). In the season eight finale, Sheldon and Amy get into a fight about commitment on their fifth anniversary. The two get married in the eleventh-season finale. 
Soft Kitt. Its repeated use in the series popularized the song. She similarly interacts with other characters in this manner. Television closing logo. These cards are archived on Lorre's website. The series final vanity card reads simply "The End". 
Receptio. Initial reception for the series was mixed. Later seasons received more acclaim and in 2013, TV Guide ranked the series #52 on its list of the 60 Best Series of All Time. 
U. Chuck Lorre and CBS Entertainment president Nina Tassler also credit the success to the influence of Molaro, in particular the deepening exploration of the firmly established regular characters and their interpersonal relationships, such as the on-again, off-again relationship between Leonard and Penny. This was due to rising ratings. This gave the show an overall total of 1. 13 million viewers, making it E4's most-watched programme for that week. The increased ratings continued over subsequent weeks. Episode 19, the highest-viewed episode of the season, attracted 1. 4 million viewers. The second half of season seven aired in mid 2014. The eighth season premiered on E4 on October 23, 2014 at 8:30 pm. The Big Bang Theory started off quietly in Canada, but managed to garner major success in later seasons. On February 14, 2008, the series debuted in the United Kingdom on channels E4 and Channel 4. Broadcast of old shows began airing in September 2011. Although details of the syndication deal have not been revealed, it was reported the deal "set a record price for a cable off-network sitcom purchase". Warner Bros. Television controls the online rights for the show. Dmitriy Tankovich (who plays Leonard's counterpart, "Seva") said in an interview, "I'm upset. I consider this to be the rock bottom of my career. Jon Favreau directed and executive produced the pilot. Alongside Armitage as 9-year-old Sheldon Cooper and Perry as Mary Cooper, Lance Barber stars as George Cooper, Sheldon's father; Raegan Revord stars as Missy Cooper, Sheldon's twin sister; and Montana Jordan as George Cooper Jr. , Sheldon's older brother. On January 6, 2018, the show was renewed for a second season. External link. 
Official website. 