Aticle talk read view source view history search wikpedt qby 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or homo sapiens. , had arrived on the indian subcontinent from africa, where they had earlier evolved. S1 ii651 theearliest known modern human remains in south asia date to about 30,000 years ago. After 6500 bce, evidence for domestication of food crops and animals,construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus, appeared in mehrgarh and other sites in what is now balochistan. These graduallydeveloped into the indus valley civilisation the first urban culture in south asia which flourished during 2500-1900 bce in what is now pakistan andwestern india. Centred around cities such as mohenjo-daro, harappa, dholavira, and kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilizationengaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade. Per capita 483,48401 119%ntotal $2972 tition sin+ per capita 482,191 142naduring the same time, its nominal per capita income, increased from $64 annually to $2,041, and its literacy rate from 16.6% to 74%. From being comparatively destitute country in 1951, india has become afast-growing major economy, hub for information technology services, with an expanding middle class. It has space program which includes several planned or completed lunar missions. Indian movies, music,and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture. India has substantially reduced its rate of poverty, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality. India is nuclear weapons state, whichranks high in military expenditure. It has disputes over kashmir with its neighbors, pakistan and china, unresolved since the mid-20th century. Among the socioeconomic challenges india faces are genderinequality, child malnutrition,4 and rising levels of air pollution. Indias land is megadiverse, with four biodiversity hotspots. Its forest cover comprises 21.4% of its area. 2 indias wildlife, which has traditionallybeen viewed with tolerance in india culture, is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats it has space program which includes several planned or completed lunar missions. Indian movies, music,been viewed with tolerance in india culture, is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats. Ee lid does esas dediees eg ell slid ossse no od oi oil llinpra history when the chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the pallavas fromfarther south, who in turn were opposed by the pandyas and the cholas from still farther south. No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistentlycontrol lands much beyond his core region. During this time, pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy wereaccommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes. The caste system consequently began to show regional differences. 5in the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the tamil language. They were imitated all over india and led to both the resurgence ofhinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent. Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in greatclockwise from upper left: map ofthe rough extent ofthe empire of ashoka, ca 250 bce; the dhamek stupa atsamath, 249 bce, the site of the bucha fst sermon twocenturies earlier; the map of india, ca 350 ce: cave26 ofthe rock-cut ajanta caves, ith century cenumbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well. Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as india underwent another urbanisation. By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effectswere felt in south-east asia, as south indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day myanmar, thailand, laos, cambodia, vietnam, philippines, malaysia, and java an eastern province of the achaemenid empire: and ultimately its cognate. The sanskrit sindhu. Or river.