John Fitzgerald Kennedy (May 29, 1917 – November 22, 1963), often referred to by the initials JFK and Jack, was an American politician who served as the 35th president of the United States from January 1961 until his assassination in November 1963. Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War, and the majority of his work as president dealt with managing relations with the Soviet Union and Cuba. A Democrat, Kennedy represented Massachusetts in the U. House of Representatives and Senate prior to becoming president. Kennedy was born into a wealthy, political family in Brookline, Massachusetts. He graduated from Harvard University in 1940, before joining the U. Senate and served as the junior Senator from Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960. The Strategic Hamlet Program began in Vietnam during his presidency. On November 22, 1963, he was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Vice President Lyndon B. Marxist Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the state crime, but he was shot to death by Jack Ruby two days later. His personal life has also been the focus of considerable interest, following revelations of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs. 
Early life and educatio. John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, at 83 Beals Street in the Boston suburb of Brookline, Massachusetts, to Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. , a businessman and politician, and Rose Kennedy (née Fitzgerald), a philanthropist and socialite. His paternal grandfather, P. Kennedy, was a Massachusetts state senator. Kennedy's maternal grandfather and namesake, John F. Fitzgerald, served as a U. Congressman and was elected to two terms as Mayor of Boston. All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants. Kennedy had an elder brother, Joseph Jr. , and seven younger siblings: Rosemary, Kathleen ("Kick"), Eunice, Patricia, Robert ("Bobby"), Jean, and Edward ("Ted"). The family spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, a village on Cape Cod, Massachusetts; Christmas and Easter holidays were at their winter retreat in Palm Beach, Florida. What do you want to do? Kennedy's two original medals are currently on display at the John F. In 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, and Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16; a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat. Khrushchev agreed, but Kennedy did not. But I can't give up that territory to the communists and get the American people to re-elect me. "On August 21, just as the new U. Kennedy was shocked by the deaths. After Kennedy's assassination, President Johnson signed NSAM 273 on November 26, 1963. Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign. In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy both reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. Shortly afterwards, new U. S. in the arms race. Steel to rescind the price increase. Historian Carl M. In response to that, Robert Kennedy, now U. President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, at 12:30 pm Central Standard Time on Friday, November 22, 1963. He was in Texas on a political trip to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough (no relation) and conservative John Connally. Traveling in a presidential motorcade through downtown Dallas, he was shot once in the back, the bullet exiting via his throat, and once in the head. Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital for emergency medical treatment, where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later. He was 46 years old and had been in office for 1,036 days. Lee Harvey Oswald, an order filler at the Texas School Book Depository from which the shots were fired, was arrested for the murder of police officer J. Tippit and was subsequently charged with Kennedy's assassination. He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, and was shot by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be prosecuted. Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set. President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission—chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren—to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy. The results of this investigation are disputed by many. In 1979 the U. His older brother Joseph P. President Lyndon B. Truman and Dwight D. Throughout the English-speaking world, the given name Kennedy has sometimes been used in honor of President Kennedy, as well his brother Robert. 
Effect of assassinatio. Television was the primary source that kept people informed of the events that surrounded Kennedy's assassination. Further readin. External link. 
OfficialJohn F. Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. John F. 