Aticle | Talk Read View source View history | Search Wikpedt Q  =I WIKIPEDIA iki  By 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or Homo sapiens
, had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa, where they had earlier evolved
 The earliest known modern human remains in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago
 after 6500 BCE, evidence for domestication of food crops and animals, construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus, appeared in Mehrgarh and other sites in what is now Balochistan
'°7! These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation  the first urban culture in South Asia! which flourished during 2500-1900 BCE in what is now Pakistan and western India
 Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilization engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade
©9) (Grd) + Per capita 483,48401 (119%n) GDP (nominal) 2019 estimate Total ‘4 $2972 tition! (sin) + Per capita 482,191 (142na) Gini (2013) 339i) medium - 79th HDI (2017) 40 ‘Wikiquote * Wikivoyage Printlexport Create a book Download as PDF Printable version During the same time, its nominal per capita income, increased from $64 annually to $2,041, and its literacy rate from 16
6% to 74%
 From being a comparatively destitute country in 1951,'*! india has become a fast-growing major economy, a hub for information technology services, with an expanding middle class
'**! it has a space program which includes several planned or completed lunar missions
 Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture
'*®! india has substantially reduced its rate of poverty, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality
'“7! india is a nuclear weapons state, which ranks high in military expenditure
 It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbors, Pakistan and China, unresolved since the mid-20th century
'“8! among the socioeconomic challenges India faces are gender inequality, child malnutrition, and rising levels of air pollution
°! india's land is megadiverse, with four biodiversity hotspots
" its forest cover comprises 21
4% of its area
'=2! India's wildlife, which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in India’s culture,"] is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats '**! it has a space program which includes several planned or completed lunar missions
 Indian movies, music, been viewed with tolerance in India’s culture,"] is supported among these forests, and elsewhere, in protected habitats
 ee LID DOES ESAS I DEDIEES EG ELL SLID OSS Se I NO OD I OI OIL LLIN Languages ° Contents  aT aay pra 2 History ~s — re 2 °! When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south
 No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond his core region
'™! During this time, pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes
 The caste system consequently began to show regional differences
 In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language
” They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent
" indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great EI TR Clockwise from upper left: () A map ofthe rough extent of the empire of Ashoka, ca 250 BCE; () The Dhamek Stupa at Samath, 249 BCE, the site of the Bucha’s fst sermon two centuries earlier; (6) The map of india, ca 350 CE: (6) Cave 26 ofthe rock-cut Ajanta Caves, ith century CE numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well
'°8! Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation
°®! By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Java  an eastern province of the Achaemenid empire: and ultimately its cognate
 the Sanskrit Sindhu
 or "river 
